Today societies are more heterogenous than ever before in the history.
To leave no one behind, the role of civil society is to conduct more inclusive projects and contribute to social inclusion of the vulnerable ones.
In order to provide a perspective to you as volunteers, first, you will learn what social exclusion and inclusion means, then the mechanisms of social exclusion and how to build an inclusive environment in projects.
The strategies to create a more inclusive project will also be presented to you.
As it was stated by UN, social exclusion is a multidimensional phenomenon not limited to material deprivation; poverty is an important dimension of exclusion, albeit only one dimension.
Accordingly, social inclusion processes involve more than improving access to economic resources.
Social exclusion describes a state in which individuals are unable to participate fully in economic, social, political and cultural life, as well as the process leading to and sustaining such a state.
So, there are different groups of people socially excluded in different societies in different exclusion levels.
Social inclusion is mostly defined with its relationship to social exclusion.
It is basically based on the idea of inclusion of the excluded one.
UN describes social inclusion as the process of improving the terms of participation in society, particularly for people who are disadvantaged, through enhancing opportunities, access to resources, voice and respect for rights.
Every person should reach the benefits of prosperity and enjoy minimum standards of well-being Enshrined in the 2030 Agenda of UN.
This is captured in the 17 Sustainable Development Goals that are aimed at freeing all nations and people and all segments of society from poverty and hunger and to ensure, among other things, healthy lives and access to education, modern energy and information.
Recognizing that these goals are difficult to achieve without making institutions work for those who are deepest in poverty and most vulnerable.
Providing equal access to justice and inclusive decision-making process will guarantee to the Agenda embraces broad targets aimed at promoting the rule of law, ensuring equal access to justice and broadly fostering inclusive and participatory decision-making.
It is important to remember! No single global, goal-setting agenda can adequately address.
A single global, goal setting agenda cannot adequately address multiple aspects of exclusion or comprehensively promote coverage, especially given the diversity of conditions around the world.
Social inclusion needs to be made into a policy with different goals, including different subjects and people.
But it is important to define the principles and perspective.
It should be defined as an interactive process, not a mere adaptation.
The task for the majority or receiving/hosting community:
To be responsible to enable opportunities for the newcomers that they are able to integrate them into different settings and fields of society.
Sport is a significant tool to promote social inclusion.
However, it has a strong link with social exclusion as well as social inclusion.
We should problematize and critically point out the basic assumptions, distinctions, ideologies and research positions that form the concepts surrounding sports as a means of social inclusion.
Collins and Haudenhuy, on the other hand, argue that if such problematization and revelation are not carried out empirically, sports-based social inclusion policies and programs will be insufficient in the face of the exclusionary powers such plans are trying to combat.
Therefore, it incorporates and reproduces inequality mechanisms existing in the society.
Sport can be discriminatory and create conflicts - no positive results can be achieved with every sporting event.
Therefore, it is important to examine, create and implement ways in which sports and physical activity can lead to social inclusion and integration.
WE SHOULD USE PROPER STRATEGIES TO INCREASE INCLUSION
1- First of all, we should give voice to excluded one.
In the projects, with the aim of social inclusion of people via/in sport it is important to cover the perspective of excluded ones.
As Dağkas and Armor stated this is an important tool to activate them in sports and physical activities.
It is also important to include individuals with little or no sports experience.
2- Second, we should target excluded groups as well.
Inclusion can be achieved through changing the knowledge, attitudes, perspectives and behaviours of both excluding and excluded.
3- Third, we are supposed to understand exclusionary mechanisms.
It is important to examine exclusionary mechanisms first to provide effective policies for inclusion.
“Merely” raising participation rates of specific target/problem groups (and fixing the presumed personal deficits of such groups),
leaving the exclusionary mechanisms of such policies and practices mainly unproblematized and under-examined create the risk for reproduction of such inequality and discrimination.
Spandler reminds us that we need to be mindful of
(i)	the contexts in which inclusion policies and (sport-based) interventions are implemented;
(ii)	the assumptions that lie, often implicitly, behind such policies and interventions; and
(iii)	the consequences of such policies and interventions.
4- Fourth , we should select and train volunteers.
Training for volunteers should be provided before and during the activities.
Supervision of volunteers during the activities is important.
Volunteers themselves should include different groups of people.
People from the target group of the Project or event should be included in the volunteer groups to provide an equal atmosphere.